---
title: "Authentication in SPAs"
date: 2020-02-22T19:57:55+01:00
lastmod: 2020-03-04T11:36:41+01:00

categories: ["Security", "Research"]
tags: ["SPA", "auth", "authentication"]
authors: ["László GÖRÖG"]
summary: "Let's talk about authentication workflows in Single Page Applications."
---
Disclaimer: I am not a security expert. This article is a result of an investigation about authentication and
authorization in Single Page Applications.

Requirements for authentication in Browser-Based Apps:

* Logging in *MUST* authenticate a user;
* Logging in *SHOULD* authenticate a user in every window;
* A remember me functionality *MAY* be provided;
  * Remember me functionality *MUST* reauthenticate a user;
* Logging out *MUST* invalidate the authentication of a user;
* Logging out *MUST* invalidate remember me functionality if there is any;
* Closing the browser *MUST* invalidate the authentication of a user;
* Data for identifying a user *MUST* kept secure.

All of these are covered in regular multi page applications using good old fashioned session cookie.

Requirements for an API endpoint:

* An API endpoint *SHOULD* be stateless.

However this requirement is not a must but it is recommended to avoid state for scalability. To identifying a user
without state we need some kind of token for example [JWT][ietf-jwt] or [PASETO][paseto]. For later on I will mainly
refer to JWT tokens.

Available storage options on client side:

* [Cookie][cookie]
* [Web Storage][web-storage]
  * [Session Storage][session-storage]
  * [Local Storage][local-storage]

Possible attacks:

* [XSS: Cross-site scripting][owasp-xss]
* [CSRF/XSRF: Cross Site Request Forgery][owasp-csrf]

When a token stored in a cookie a site can be vulnerable against CRSF/XSRF attacks because it is attached to the header
of requests automatically by the browser without the correct `SameSite` value. Gladly `SameSite` is [implemented by
many browsers][set-cookie-browser-compatibility] by now. The `HttpOnly` directive makes cookies protected against XSS.
This value can be set only on the backend and not on the frontend. The use of `HttpOnly` is de facto now but it is
better to mention it.

Session Storage can be discarded right away as it exists per window/tab which means that a user has to authenticate
every one of them. Furthermore, storing a token in Web Storage is discouraged. You can read about it in details on the
["Security Risks"][owasp-security-risks] section of "Session Management Cheat Sheet" by OWASP. It does not means that it
cannot be done the ["Token storage on client side"][owasp-token-storage-on-client-side] section of "JSON Web Token Cheat
Sheet for Java" by OWASP provides a possible workaround but it is easy to implement it incorrectly. The ["Local
Storage"][owasp-local-storage] section of "HTML5 Security Cheat Sheet" by OWASP says the following:

> - A single Cross Site Scripting can be used to steal all the data in these objects, so again it’s recommended not to
> store sensitive information in local storage.
> - A single Cross Site Scripting can be used to load malicious data into these objects too, so don’t consider objects
> in these to be trusted.

There are many tutorials on the web which shows how to create a JWT token after a successful authentication and then
store it in web storage and let sanitization take care of protecting against XSS. As well there are some libraries which
follow these tutorials. Sanitization is something you shouldn't trust. People can still find issues in sanitizers not
necessarily because the implementation is bad but because the web is complicated and a special char in a browser can
cause some unexpected results during render.

The problem with JWT. JWT is a token which has a validity date. This means that no matter where you store it, it will be
valid even after the user logs out. The recommendation for resolving this is to keep track of the invalidated tokens
which means adding state to the API. In my opinion this is simply not the best way of dealing with the problem.
Moreover, when the browser is closed the logout is not automatic. It can be handled with a use of a session cookie which
stores a random string and that string is also added to the token and the two can be compared. The absence of that
cookie would mean the browser was closed or the client cleared the cookies. In my opinion the problem is that JWT is not
meant for using it in browser-based applications.

My recommendation is to use an API gateway and handle the authentication in the gateway. This means using a regular
session cookie in the browser and prevent CSRF/XSRF with `X-XSRF-TOKEN`/`X-CSRF-TOKEN`. On the server side a JWT token
can be stored and never exposed to the user. This is not something I came up with IETF contains a draft for "OAuth 2.0
for Browser-Based Apps" originally named [draft-parecki-oauth-browser-based-apps][draft-parecki-oauth-browser-based-apps-02]
which was then renamed to [draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps][draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04]. In both cases
[section 6.2][draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04-6-2] covers the scenario I described.

[ietf-jwt]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519
[paseto]: https://github.com/paragonie/paseto
[cookie]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Cookies
[web-storage]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Storage_API
[session-storage]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/sessionStorage
[local-storage]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage
[owasp-xss]: https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/xss/
[owasp-csrf]: https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/csrf
[owasp-security-risks]: https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Session_Management_Cheat_Sheet.html#security-risks
[owasp-token-storage-on-client-side]: https://owasp.org/www-project-cheat-sheets/cheatsheets/JSON_Web_Token_Cheat_Sheet_for_Java#token-storage-on-client-side
[owasp-local-storage]: https://owasp.org/www-project-cheat-sheets/cheatsheets/HTML5_Security_Cheat_Sheet#local-storage
[set-cookie-browser-compatibility]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie#Browser_compatibility
[draft-parecki-oauth-browser-based-apps-02]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-parecki-oauth-browser-based-apps-02
[draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04
[draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04-6-2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps-04#section-6.2
